---
layout: post
title: "Starting a Nonprofit"
authors:
- stvnrlly
date: 2016-10-6 09:32:01
categories: blog
description: "Our plan for becoming a nonprofit"
---

Earlier this year, we mentioned that we were considering turning Code for DC
into a nonprofit organization. The task seemed daunting, and progress towards it
was only in fits and starts. There seemed to be one major obstacle: the correct
path was not entirely clear, making it difficult to see the plan from start to
finish.

So, the other day, co-founder Matt Bailey and I sat down and tried to put the
pieces together into a coherent plan. Here's the process, as we understand it so
far.

<!--more-->

Because organizations are primarily regulated at the state level, we began
there. At first, the process appeared to involve three separate DC agencies:

- the Department of Consumer and Regulatory Affairs (DCRA),
- the Office of the Deputy Mayor for Planning and Economic Development (DMPED), and
- the Office of Tax and Revenue (OTR)

Both DCRA and DMPED have pages about creating a nonprofit. [The DCRA
page](http://dcra.dc.gov/service/register-and-license-non-profit-organization)
covers the main steps, while [the DMPED page](http://dmped.dc.gov/node/814892)
covers over-arching questions and tasks, some of which overlap with DCRA steps.
At first, this caused some confusion, as it was unclear how the pages related to
each other.

However, since a registrant files the form with DCRA, that seems like the
primary one. Additionally, we figured out that you don't complete all of the
state steps before completing the federal steps. Instead, you go back and forth
between the two. The Free Law Project (FLP) went through the process a couple years
ago in California and [wrote up their
steps](http://michaeljaylissner.com/posts/2014/10/14/becoming-a-non-profit/),
which helped make the flow a little more clear.

## Brief detour: the Unified Registration statement

At the bottom of the DCRA guide, they say:

> Many customers have asked about using the Unified Registration Statement (URS). We do accept the URS, however you will still need to apply for a Charitable Solicitation BBL if you directly or indirectly solicit for any contribution in the District of Columbia.

We had no idea what that meant, so we looked up the URS. It appears to be a form
to [standardize nonprofit registration across
states](http://multistatefiling.org/). However, while it's accepted by DC, it
seems to require the same stuff, and that statement isn't exactly a glowing
endorsement. Since the last update to the URS was in March 2014, we didn't think
that this was a great idea.

It seems like DC could pretty easily switch over to using the URS and fully
support the standard, or otherwise should not introduce an additional wrinkle
into the registration process.

Anyway, combining the various resources that we've found, these seem to be the main steps:

## Organize information and other prep work

### Draft mission statement

This is not specifically a required step, but it is a useful exercise and will
come in handy as you fill out forms again and again. The mission statement
should be short and to the point. You can use the [OpenGov
Foundation's](https://github.com/opengovfoundation/legal-information/blob/master/bylaws.md#section-1-purposes)
as an example.

### Draft Articles of Incorporation

These will be submitted later, but you should probably do it now. They're
relatively short and hit a few key points that DC's Superintended of
Corporations cares about. You'll get to use that mission statement here. The
OpenGov Foundation's certificate of incorporation (which you'll receive after
filing the DNP-1 later) [includes their articles of
incorporation](https://github.com/opengovfoundation/legal-information/blob/master/dc-certificate-of-incorporation.pdf)

### Draft bylaws

These will also come into play later, but are good to do now rather than rush
once the organization is already up and running. The bylaws set forth the actual
rules for operation of the organization, and thus set the tenor for the overall
function. As before, you can use the [OpenGov Foundation's
bylaws](https://github.com/opengovfoundation/legal-information/blob/master/bylaws.md)
as a guide, but note that they have both a Board of Directors and a Board of
Advisors, the latter of which may not be relevant to you.

As part of this step, you'll also have to consider whether your organization
will have "members". This has a specific legal meaning of somebody who votes in
the election of directors and things like that. [D.C. Code §
29-401.02(24)](https://beta.code.dccouncil.us/dc/council/code/sections/29-401.02.html).
They are not required to form a nonprofit. [D.C. Code § 29-404.01(a)
](https://beta.code.dccouncil.us/dc/council/code/sections/29-404.01.html). We
decided that we probably do not need members, but other organizations may find
them useful.

### Plan out the Board of Directors

This is listed as "establishing" a board of directors in a variety of places,
but that seems difficult to do before the organization actually exists. Instead,
we think this means that you should contact people and line them up to join the
board as soon as it is possible. You'll need to have at least 3 of them. [D.C.
Code §
29-406.03(a)](https://beta.code.dccouncil.us/dc/council/code/sections/29-406.03.html).
We couldn't tell immediately if officers can also be directors, but as a
practical matter they shouldn't.

### Determine initial officers

These are the people who will carry out the corporate nonprofit stuff once the
organization is formed. They are _likely_ to be the people doing the
incorporating, but you should work out who will have which role. A nonprofit in
DC is required to have at least a President and a Treasurer, though you can
create more if it's useful. [D.C. Code §
29-406.40(a)](https://beta.code.dccouncil.us/dc/council/code/sections/29-406.40.html).

### Get a registered agent

This is not mentioned anywhere on either site, but is a required element of
DNP-1. DCRA provides more information on a [registered agent
page](http://dcra.dc.gov/service/corporate-registration-registered-agent) and a
[set of
forms](http://dcra.dc.gov/sites/default/files/dc/sites/dcra/publication/attachments/RA-1-7.pdf),
but it's not super clear who this person can be. There are two types, commercial
and noncommercial, though the set of forms only includes a registration form for
commercial agents. This makes it *seem* like somebody like me could serve as a
noncommercial registered agent for an organization, but it's also possible that
that's an incorrect reading of [DCOC §
29.104.04](https://beta.code.dccouncil.us/dc/council/code/sections/29-104.04.html).

### Figure out your office

This is listed as one of the last steps on the DCRA site, but it seems good to
know up front. It looks like this can be a commercial building with a
Certificate of Occupancy or a home with a Home Occupation Permit.

### Determine whether you'll need a business license

This is also listed as one of the last steps on the DCRA site, but likewise
seems good to know up front.

DCRA doesn't provide any real information about this in the guide, advising
registrants to instead contact the Business Licensing Division by phone. As a
result, we have no idea what sort of calculus goes into determining whether or
not a license is required.

## File the Articles of Incorporation with Form DNP-1

The form isn't actually linked from the DCRA page, but can [easily be
found](http://dcra.dc.gov/sites/default/files/dc/sites/dcra/publication/attachments/Articles%20of%20Incorporation%20of%20Domestic%20Nonprofit%20Corporation%20DNP-1.pdf)
by searching.

## File tax stuff with the IRS

It's a bit unclear what order things are supposed to happen in here. This is the
text on DC's OTR site:

> While you may already be registered as a non-profit with the Internal Revenue
Service (IRS), and if you're not you'll need to do this first, to do business in
the District of Columbia you'll also need to register with District of Columbia
Office of Tax and Revenue (OTR).

While this is in an [IRS publication on 501(c)(3)
status](https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/p4220.pdf):

> Do not apply for an EIN until your organization is legally formed. Applying
for an EIN signals to IRS computer systems that an organization has been
created, and therefore triggers filing requirements.

We think that "legally formed" means that you've gotten your certificate of
incorporation back from DCRA, so this would be the appropriate place for this
step. In FLP's flow, things went slightly differently: they got an EIN before
incorporating. This is probably fine, as you have 27 months after that EIN
trigger to file for an exemption.

### Get an Employer Identification Number

The organization might not plan to actually employ anybody, but it'll still need
an EIN. This is essentially the Social Security Number of organizations. You can
apply for an EIN through [Form SS-4](https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/fss4.pdf)
or
[online](https://www.irs.gov/businesses/small-businesses-self-employed/apply-for-an-employer-identification-number-ein-online).

### File for an exemption

Now that you have an EIN, you can file for exempt status. The [IRS
publication](https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/p4220.pdf) quoted above is a decent
primer, and there are also legal-ish [instructions for Form
1023](https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/i1023.pdf). However, if you don't expect
to receive more than $50,000 in any of the next 3 years, you can file [Form
1023-EZ](https://www.irs.gov/uac/about-form-1023ez) instead. It appears that you
can file the 1023-EZ only online by searching for it on pay.gov.

## File tax stuff with DC

This portion of the process is managed by DC's OTR. As with DNP-1, the forms
aren't actually linked from the DCRA guide, but can be found quickly. [Form
500](http://otr.cfo.dc.gov/sites/default/files/dc/sites/otr/publication/attachments/48225_FR-500_81315.pdf)
is the form to register with the office, and [Form
164](http://otr.cfo.dc.gov/sites/default/files/dc/sites/otr/publication/attachments/fr-164_rev12-07_application_package.pdf)
is the form to apply for the tax exemption.

Form 500 has a bunch of elements, and initially seems things that a normal
person would have no idea about, but the instructions are good. The three pages
of "Codes for Principal Activity" are quite daunting, but luckily we think we
fall into the `813000` catch-all category of "Religious, Grantmaking, Civic,
Professional, & Similar Organizations (including condominium and homeowners
associations)". In case you're curious, these codes are the NAICS codes used by
the federal government to categorize businesses.

Form 164 is weirder and is typeset with some sort of typewriter font that makes
it hard to read, but seems relatively straightforward. It requires you to
specify the end of your annual accounting period, and we don't know whether that
makes any sort of difference. It also asks for "Physical Location(s) of Personal
Property in the District", which may or may not be related to the registered
agent. There's a $70 fee for out-of-state organizations, but no mention of a fee
for DC organizations.

Another side note: every DC form in this process looks different. This isn't a
huge deal, but there is a psychological cost to the registrant in needing to
figure out how to approach each of these forms.

## Get a Basic Business License, maybe

If you determined earlier that this is necessary, do it here.

According to the [DCRA BBL Fact
Sheet](http://dcra.dc.gov/sites/default/files/dc/sites/dcra/publication/attachments/5%20Basic%20Steps%20to%20Opening%20a%20Business%20Handout%20Final.pdf),
most of the steps should be completed by this point. There's a fee of at least
$95 for this, though there's another $200 fee that seems to be for certain
categories of business. It's not super clear.

## That's It?

The only thing left after this point is to operate the organization in full
compliance with all applicable laws and regulations!

As noted above, we're at the very beginning of this process, and are using this
post to work out a plan of action. We will do our best to update it as our
information improves, but please do not mistake this for the advice of an
expert.
